[00:00:00] Stat students, I'm Daren Starnes coming to you from beautiful Hilton Head, South Carolina. This is the final video in AP Daily for AP Statistics. You've made it to the end. Congratulations. Topic 9.6, skills focus, selecting an appropriate inference procedure. What will you learn in this video? First, what inference methods did you learn about in units six through nine? And second, how can you identify the appropriate inference procedure to use in a given setting on the AP exam? Let's do an inference recap. Remember that there are two main goals of inference. If you're trying to estimate a parameter, you use a confidence interval. If you're trying to test a claim, you do a significance test. Also remember that the appropriate inference method depends on the type of data. So in unit six, you did inference for categorical data, one or two proportions. In unit seven, inference for quantitative data, one or two means. In unit eight, inference for categorical data, chi square, and in unit nine, inference for quantitative data, slopes. On confidence intervals, the formula on the formula sheet is the same for all procedures. Statistic plus or minus the critical value from an appropriate distribution times the standard error of the statistic. You should always do these steps. Define the parameter you want to estimate, identify the inference procedure, verify conditions, calculate the interval and interpret the interval in context. You do not need to interpret the confidence level unless you're specifically asked. Now you probably will be asked to do so at some point on the AP exam. How about significance tests? Well, the formula on the formula sheet, standardized test statistic equals statistic minus parameter over standard error of the statistic. The steps are similar. We start by stating null and alternative hypotheses, and be sure to define any parameters. Give your significance level. Identify the inference procedure. Verify conditions. Calculate the test statistic and P value and then make a conclusion based on the P value. You don't need to interpret that P value unless you're specifically asked and you likely will be asked to do so somewhere on the AP exam. Here's a slide that summarizes all of unit six, the four different inference procedures you learned, their goal, the method, the name, the formula and the conditions that you need to check. I encourage you to refer back to these slides for each unit after the video. Here are the ones for unit seven, where you're doing inference about quantitative data for means. Just a note, one sample methods also include inference about a mean when you have paired data. Here's unit eight, inference for categorical data, chi square. Remember the three types of chi square depend on the goal of the test. Whether you have one variable or whether you have two variables that you're studying and how the data were collected. And for unit nine, inference for quantitative data about slopes. We can estimate a slope or we can test a claim about the slope. The conditions there are the most challenging of all. There are so many to deal with and they're very hard to check. How do you select the right inference procedure? Well, let's consider those units. Categorical data for proportions, we have these four we might choose. Quantitative data for means. We have these four we might choose. Categorical data for chi square, we have these three, and quantitative data for slopes, we have these two. So, just in a quick count, we have 13. Lucky 13 inference procedures. Now, just to an aside, if you count the paired data procedures, uh, under quantitative data for means as separate, then you can get to 15 if you don't like 13. Let's look at an example. This is from the 1997 AP exam question number five. A company bakes computer chips in two ovens, oven A and oven B. The chips are randomly assigned to an oven and hundreds of chips are baked each hour. The percentage of defective chips coming from these ovens for each hour of production throughout a day is shown below. Here's the table. The percentage of defective chips produced each hour by oven A has a mean of 33.56 and a standard deviation of 5.20. The percentage of defective chips produced each hour by oven B has a mean of 32.44 and a standard deviation of 3.78. The hourly differences in percentages for oven A minus oven B have a mean of 1.11 and a standard deviation of 4.28. Does there appear to be a difference between oven A

27.8s
please finish

[00:04:59] and oven B with respect to the mean percentages of defective chips produced? Give appropriate statistical evidence to support your answer. So we're trying to identify the correct inference method. Why don't you start with thinking about what each individual or case in the data set represents. Here, it's a batch of chips produced in an hour in one of these two ovens. The variable of interest that we're measuring on that batch of chips is the percentage that are defective. And that's a quantitative variable, the percent defective out of a batch. So we want to do inference about quantitative data here for means. The mean percentage is mentioned in the question. And so we know we're in this column from unit seven. All we need to do is narrow it down from there. Do we have one sample, paired data or two samples? Well, here, the data are paired by hour. The batch is made in hour four in oven A and oven B may be impacted by the fact that it's the fourth hour of production and so on for the other hours. So we have paired data. And finally, is our goal to estimate a parameter or to test a claim? Based on the question, does there appear to be a difference? That sounds like testing a claim. So from the four options, we need to do a one sample t test for a mean with paired data. Some people like to call this a paired t test. So that's a process we can use to select the right inference procedure. And that's really important if you're going to have to do a free response question, because if you get off on the wrong foot, you may not earn very much credit using the incorrect procedure. So let's practice. This is a wonderful resource as you get prepared for the AP exam developed by Larry Green of Lake Tahoe Community College. At his site, you can get a randomly selected research question and then you can choose which of the inference procedures is the appropriate one to use, exactly the skill we're trying to develop. Here's one about whether political affiliation related to the month that the person was born in? 3000 voters were studied. So let's go through our process and individual or case here in the data set would be a voter. You can almost picture the spreadsheet of the data and just think about what each row would have on it. It's one voter. And what did they record about that voter? They recorded the birth month and they recorded the voter's political affiliation. So we have two variables. Those variables are both categorical, puts their values into categories. So we want to do inference for categorical data, chi square, because we have the relationship between two categorical variables. Well on our chart that puts us in unit eight. We just need to figure out which of the three chi square tests is appropriate in this case. So are we dealing with one variable, two variables coming from one sample or two variables coming from multiple samples or treatments in an experiment. What says that we're 3000 voters studied. So that's just one sample of voters. Two variables. And that means we want a chi square test for independence shown here on our unit eight chart. What should we take away from this video? Well, you learned a lot of inference methods in units six through nine. Feel free to come back to the video and look at those summary charts for each of the four units. And how can we identify the appropriate inference procedure to use in a given setting? Find the individual or case in the data set. Imagine the data spreadsheet. Identify the variable or variables of interest that are recorded for each individual or case. Categorize the type of data as categorical or quantitative, and figure out whether you're doing inference uh, for a mean or a proportion or a chi square or a slope, and also whether you're trying to estimate or test a claim. So I want to thank you on behalf of all of the AP